---
layout: default
title: Home
nav_order: 1
description: "SEAS: Statistical Enrichment Analysis of Samples"
permalink: /
---

# SEAS: Statistical Enrichment Analysis of Samples
{: .fs-9 }

{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

[Web server](https://samuelbharti.shinyapps.io/SEAS){: .btn .btn-primary .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 .mr-2 } [View it on GitHub](https://github.com/aimed-uab/SEAS){: .btn .fs-5 .mb-4 .mb-md-0 }

---

### Background: 
Unsupervised learning technique such as clustering and embedding has been increasingly popular to cluster biological samples from high-dimensional omics data. Extracting clinical data or sample meta-data shared in common among biological samples of a given biological condition remains a major challenge. Here, we describe a powerful analytical method called Statistical Enrichment Analysis of Samples (SEAS) for interpreting clustered or embedded sample data from omics studies. The method derives its power by focusing on sample sets, that is, groups of biological samples that were constructed for various purposes, e.g., manual curation of samples sharing specific characteristics or automated cluster generated by embedding sample omic profiles from multi-dimensional omics space. The samples in the sample set share common clinical measurements, which we refer to as “clinotypes”, such as age group, gender, treatment status, or survival days. We demonstrate how SEAS yields insights into biological data sets, using both simulated disease sample sets and glioblastoma samples. Notably, where single-sample analysis finds little similarity between two independent studies of patient survival in the condition tested, SEAS reveals many clinotypes in common. The SEAS tool is made publicly available as a freely available software package

### Approach: 
In this work, we defined and provided the initial solution for the Statistical Enrichment Analysis of Samples (SEAS) problem. Here, we denoted a patient population S and a set of all clinical attributes C. Given any cohort s in S, the main question is which attributes are representative or enriched in s. To answer the question, we applied the ‘gene-set enrichment analysis’ method to computer the enrichment score and the statistical significance for each attribute. We customized the enrichment method to handle both numerical and categorical attributes.

### Result: 
We implemented the SEAS in an online prototype at [shinyapps](https://samuelbharti.shinyapps.io/SEAS) and showed that SEAS tackled two problems in The Cancer Genome Atlas’ GBM clinical case-study. First, enriched clinical features appearing in the demo cohort showed that SEAS could detect potential ‘bias’ in the selected cohort if the researcher were not aware. Second, when analyzing two different cohorts with different chemotherapy clinical improvement outcomes, SEAS detected no enriched feature, suggesting that the researcher could safely select these two cohorts to further study genetic factors that affect chemotherapy outcome in GBM.
